Basic Jira Interview Questions
1. What is Jira?
Jira is a project management and issue-tracking tool developed by Atlassian. It is widely used for Agile software development, bug tracking, and workflow management. Jira supports Scrum and Kanban methodologies, making it a powerful tool for teams following Agile practices.

2. What are the key features of Jira?
Issue tracking – Allows tracking of bugs, tasks, and features.
Agile boards – Provides Scrum and Kanban boards.
Workflow customization – Enables custom workflows for different project needs.
Reporting and dashboards – Offers various reports like burndown charts, velocity reports, etc.
Permissions and security – Granular control over user access.
Integration support – Works with Confluence, Bitbucket, Jenkins, and other tools.

3. What are issues in Jira?
Issues in Jira represent tasks, bugs, user stories, or any work that needs to be tracked. Each issue has attributes like status, priority, assignee, and due date.

4. What are the different types of issues in Jira?
Epic – Large body of work that can be broken into multiple stories.
Story – A feature or functionality request.
Task – A standard work item.
Bug – A defect or error in the software.
Sub-task – A smaller unit of work within a task.

5. What is a Jira workflow?
A workflow in Jira defines the sequence of statuses and transitions that an issue follows during its lifecycle, from creation to completion.

6. What are the different types of reports available in Jira?
Jira provides various reports such as:
Sprint Report
Burndown Chart
Velocity Chart
Cumulative Flow Diagram
Control Chart
Pie Chart Report

7. What is the difference between a Scrum and Kanban board in Jira?
Scrum Board – Focuses on sprint-based development with a backlog, sprint planning, and time-boxed iterations.
Kanban Board – Focuses on continuous workflow without sprints and emphasizes work-in-progress (WIP) limits.

8. How do you create a new project in Jira?
Go to Jira Dashboard > Projects > Create Project.
Select a template (Scrum, Kanban, or Bug Tracking).
Configure project settings and name.
Click Create.

9. What are Epics, Stories, and Tasks in Jira?
Epic – A large work item that spans multiple sprints.
Story – A user requirement that needs to be implemented.
Task – A general work item assigned to a team member.

10. How do you create a sub-task in Jira?
Open the parent issue.
Click More > Create Sub-Task.
Fill in details and click Create.
Intermediate Jira Interview Questions

11. What are Jira Components and Versions?
Components – Subsections of a project used to group issues.
Versions – Used for release tracking in a project.

12. How do you configure permissions in Jira?
Permissions are managed using Permission Schemes, which define access levels for users and groups in Jira projects.

13. What are custom fields in Jira, and how do you create them?
Custom fields allow additional data capture in issues. They can be created via Administration > Issues > Custom Fields > Add Custom Field.

14. What is a Jira filter, and how do you create one?
Filters allow saving specific issue searches. They can be created using JQL (Jira Query Language) and saved for future use.

15. What is JQL (Jira Query Language)? Provide some examples.
JQL is a powerful query language for searching issues in Jira. Example:

ini
Copy
Edit
project = "MyProject" AND status = "Open"  
16. What is a backlog in Jira? How do you manage it?
A backlog is a prioritized list of work items (stories, tasks, and bugs) in a project. It is managed using Scrum Boards.

17. How do you create and manage sprints in Jira?
Navigate to the backlog.
Click Create Sprint.
Move issues into the sprint and start it.
18. How does Jira integrate with other tools like Confluence, Bitbucket, or Jenkins?
Jira integrates with:

Confluence – For documentation linking.
Bitbucket/GitHub – For code repository management.
Jenkins – For CI/CD automation.
19. What is a Jira Issue Type Scheme?
It defines available issue types for a project, ensuring consistency across projects.

20. What is the difference between Jira Software, Jira Core, and Jira Service Management?
Jira Software – Used for Agile project management.
Jira Core – Used for business projects.
Jira Service Management – IT service desk for customer support.
Advanced Jira Interview Questions
21. What is a Jira workflow scheme?
A workflow scheme maps workflows to specific issue types in a project.

22. How do you create a custom workflow in Jira?
Go to Jira Administration > Issues > Workflows.
Create a new workflow and add statuses and transitions.
Assign the workflow to a workflow scheme.
23. How do you automate tasks in Jira?
Using Jira Automation Rules or Jira REST API for event-driven automation.

24. What are post functions in Jira workflows?
Post functions are actions that occur after a workflow transition, such as sending notifications or updating fields.

25. What is the role of a Jira Administrator?
Jira Admins manage configurations, workflows, user access, integrations, and overall system health.

26. How do you handle bulk issue updates in Jira?
Using Bulk Change Operations, you can edit, move, transition, or delete multiple issues at once.

27. What are Jira Gadgets and Dashboards?
Gadgets provide data visualization, while dashboards organize multiple gadgets in a single view.

28. Explain the difference between Jira Cloud and Jira Server.
Jira Cloud – Hosted by Atlassian, requires no maintenance.
Jira Server – Self-hosted, requiring internal IT management.
29. How do you troubleshoot performance issues in Jira?
Check logs, optimize database queries, archive old issues, and increase JVM heap size.

30. What are the best practices for managing Jira projects efficiently?
Use clear workflows, proper permissions, automation, dashboards, and version control.

Scenario-Based Jira Interview Questions
31. How would you handle a situation where multiple teams need to work on the same Jira project?
Use Components to categorize work for each team.
Define Issue Type Schemes for different workflows.
Assign different Boards to each team with filters based on team-specific JQL.
Use Custom Fields to track team assignments.
32. A user reports that they cannot transition an issue from 'In Progress' to 'Done.' How would you troubleshoot this?
Check if the user has Transition Issues permission.
Verify the workflow’s transition rules (conditions, validators, post functions).
Ensure no automation rule is preventing the transition.
Confirm if any Resolution field is mandatory before moving to ‘Done.’
33. You need to create a report showing the number of issues completed in the last sprint. How would you do it?
Go to Reports > Sprint Report in Jira.
Select the desired sprint.
View completed issues.
Alternatively, use JQL:
JQL
Copy
Edit
project = "XYZ" AND sprint in closedSprints() AND status = Done
34. A team wants to track technical debt in Jira. How would you configure Jira to support this?
Create a Custom Issue Type for Technical Debt.
Define a Custom Field for Technical Debt Severity.
Use Labels or Components for classification.
Set up a Kanban Board to visualize debt items.
35. How would you set up an automation rule to notify users when a high-priority issue is created?
Go to Jira Administration > Automation.
Create a new rule:
Trigger: Issue Created.
Condition: Priority = High.
Action: Send email/slack notification.
Save and enable the rule.
JQL (Jira Query Language) Questions
36. What is JQL, and how is it used in Jira?
JQL (Jira Query Language) allows users to filter and search issues efficiently. It is used in dashboards, reports, and automation.

37. Write a JQL query to find all open bugs assigned to a specific user.
JQL
Copy
Edit
project = "XYZ" AND issuetype = Bug AND assignee = "tejas" AND status != Done
38. How do you filter issues based on a custom field using JQL?
JQL
Copy
Edit
project = "XYZ" AND "CustomFieldName" = "Value"
39. Write a JQL query to find all issues updated in the last 7 days.
JQL
Copy
Edit
updated >= -7d
40. How can JQL be used to create complex issue filters?
By using Boolean operators:

JQL
Copy
Edit
(project = "XYZ" AND status = "In Progress") OR (priority = High AND assignee = "tejas")
Jira Plugin and Integration Questions
41. What are some popular Jira plugins, and what are they used for?
BigPicture – Project portfolio management.
Tempo Timesheets – Time tracking and reporting.
Zephyr – Test management.
ScriptRunner – Advanced automation and scripting.
42. How do you integrate Jira with Jenkins for CI/CD?
Install the Jira Plugin for Jenkins.
Configure Jira API credentials in Jenkins.
Use JQL filters to trigger builds from Jira issues.
Update Jira issue status automatically when a Jenkins job completes.
43. What is the Jira REST API, and how can it be used?
The Jira REST API allows programmatic access to Jira data using HTTP requests. Example request:

sh
Copy
Edit
curl -u user:token -X GET "https://yourdomain.atlassian.net/rest/api/3/issue/ABC-123"
44. How do you create a custom Jira plugin?
Set up a Jira development environment using the Atlassian SDK.
Create a plugin skeleton:
sh
Copy
Edit
atlas-create-jira-plugin
Implement custom logic.
Compile and deploy the plugin.
45. What are the security considerations when integrating Jira with third-party tools?
Use OAuth or API tokens instead of passwords.
Restrict API access with role-based permissions.
Use SSL/TLS encryption.
Regularly audit API keys and permissions.
Jira Administration Questions
46. How do you back up and restore Jira data?
Go to Jira Administration > System > Backup Manager.
Click Create Backup.
Store the backup file securely.
To restore, use Jira Importer and upload the backup file.
47. How do you set up and manage Jira user roles and permissions?
Go to Jira Administration > User Management.
Assign users to groups (e.g., Developers, Testers, Admins).
Define Permission Schemes and apply them to projects.
48. What are Jira permission schemes, and how do they work?
Permission schemes define access levels for users. They are reusable across projects and control who can view, edit, delete, or transition issues.

49. How do you migrate Jira from one server to another?
Backup Jira data from the old server.
Install Jira on the new server.
Restore the backup using Jira Importer.
Update Jira Base URL and Database Configuration.
50. How do you optimize Jira performance for large-scale projects?
Increase JVM memory allocation.
Use archiving and issue cleanup strategies.
Optimize database indexing.
Limit custom fields and unnecessary plugins.
Enable caching and content delivery optimizations.
